README.md, before:

# check_timed_logs_fast

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/check_timed_logs_fast.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![docs.rs](https://docs.rs/check_timed_logs_fast/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/check_timed_logs_fast)

This is a blazingly fast reimplementation of the [check_timed_logs](https://exchange.nagios.org/directory/Plugins/Log-Files/check_timed_logs/details)
nagios plugin in Rust (the original is in Perl). The API stayed the same,
so you can just replace the original perl script with the binary.

The purpose of the plugin is to monitor log files and alert if there
are more than X occurrences of a regex in the last Y minutes (e.g. more
than one exception in the last minute or more than 5 warnings in the last
two minutes).  

This rewrite was triggered by problems which occur with very large
and verbose log files. The original plugin takes a long time for parsing
and nagios times out after a few seconds of getting no reaction from a
check — this then falsely shows up as a critical incident in
monitoring.


## Performance

| Log File Size     | 1.2M      | 37M        | 5.7G       |
| ------------------|-----------|------------|----------- |
| Original          | 0.878 sec | 20.287 sec | >30 min    |
| Rust Rewrite      | 0.031 sec | 0.676 sec  | 83.088 sec |
| Improvement       | 96.4 %    | 96.6 %     |            |

These metrics provide a rough idea, I haven't looked in detail at the
exact difference in RAM usage (it doesn't seem to have increased
though). The performance is also dependent on the complexity of the
regular expression.

I did the benchmarks using the following command on a high performance server
(which shouldn't really matter since only one core is utilized anyway and the
RAM fingerprint is low).

	perf stat
		-r 10
		-d ./check_timed_logs_fast -pattern '.*nonExistentPattern.*' -i 9999999 -c 1 -logfile ./log

The command executs the check ten times and parses the entire file, the
resulting average execution time is the duration in the table above.

The crazy rate of improvement comes from Rust and using `memmap` to read the
file backwards. At the moment the implementation is pretty straight forward
— one process which blocks with the i/o operations and the parsing.
I suspect that there is room for more improvement and would like to implement
two additional strategies:

1. split work into worker threads
2. asynchronous processing

Furthermore, I know for sure (because I benchmarked it) that the `fancy-regex`
crate is a slowing factor. The `regex` crate had better performance, but doesn't
support advanced regex features like look-ahead. The original `check_timed_logs`
script supports these features and since I want to stay compatible, I have to
use a (slower) crate which supports these features.


## Installation/Usage

	cargo install check_timed_logs_fast

	# a warning should be issued if there is >= 1 occurrence of either the string
	# "timeout" or "closed" in the last ten minutes. if there are >= 5 matches
	# issue a critical incident.
	check_timed_logs_fast -logfile /var/log/app.log -pattern "timeout|closed" -interval 10 -w 1 -c 5

You can use MUSL to compile a generic, static binary for some unknown linux:

	rustup target add x86_64-unknown-linux-musl
	cargo build --release --target x86_64-unknown-linux-musl


## License

	Copyright (c)

		2018 Michael Mueller, http://micha.elmueller.net/

	Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
	a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
	"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
	without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
	distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
	permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
	the following conditions:

	The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
	included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

	THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
	EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
	MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
	NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
	LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
	OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
	WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Add instructions to build debian package

README.md, after:

# check_timed_logs_fast

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/check_timed_logs_fast.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/check_timed_logs_fast)
[![docs.rs](https://docs.rs/check_timed_logs_fast/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/check_timed_logs_fast)

This is a blazingly fast reimplementation of the [check_timed_logs](https://exchange.nagios.org/directory/Plugins/Log-Files/check_timed_logs/details)
nagios plugin in Rust (the original is in Perl). The API stayed the same,
so you can just replace the original perl script with the binary.

The purpose of the plugin is to monitor log files and alert if there
are more than X occurrences of a regex in the last Y minutes (e.g. more
than one exception in the last minute or more than 5 warnings in the last
two minutes).  

This rewrite was triggered by problems which occur with very large
and verbose log files. The original plugin takes a long time for parsing
and nagios times out after a few seconds of getting no reaction from a
check — this then falsely shows up as a critical incident in
monitoring.


## Performance

| Log File Size     | 1.2M      | 37M        | 5.7G       |
| ------------------|-----------|------------|----------- |
| Original          | 0.878 sec | 20.287 sec | >30 min    |
| Rust Rewrite      | 0.031 sec | 0.676 sec  | 83.088 sec |
| Improvement       | 96.4 %    | 96.6 %     |            |

These metrics provide a rough idea, I haven't looked in detail at the
exact difference in RAM usage (it doesn't seem to have increased
though). The performance is also dependent on the complexity of the
regular expression.

I did the benchmarks using the following command on a high performance server
(which shouldn't really matter since only one core is utilized anyway and the
RAM fingerprint is low).

	perf stat
		-r 10
		-d ./check_timed_logs_fast -pattern '.*nonExistentPattern.*' -i 9999999 -c 1 -logfile ./log

The command executs the check ten times and parses the entire file, the
resulting average execution time is the duration in the table above.

The crazy rate of improvement comes from Rust and using `memmap` to read the
file backwards. At the moment the implementation is pretty straight forward
— one process which blocks with the i/o operations and the parsing.
I suspect that there is room for more improvement and would like to implement
two additional strategies:

1. split work into worker threads
2. asynchronous processing

Furthermore, I know for sure (because I benchmarked it) that the `fancy-regex`
crate is a slowing factor. The `regex` crate had better performance, but doesn't
support advanced regex features like look-ahead. The original `check_timed_logs`
script supports these features and since I want to stay compatible, I have to
use a (slower) crate which supports these features.


## Installation/Usage

	cargo install check_timed_logs_fast

	# a warning should be issued if there is >= 1 occurrence of either the string
	# "timeout" or "closed" in the last ten minutes. if there are >= 5 matches
	# issue a critical incident.
	check_timed_logs_fast -logfile /var/log/app.log -pattern "timeout|closed" -interval 10 -w 1 -c 5

You can use MUSL to compile a generic, static binary for some unknown linux:

	rustup target add x86_64-unknown-linux-musl
	cargo build --release --target x86_64-unknown-linux-musl


## Building a Debian package

Build the package like this:

* Clone from https://github.com/cmichi/check_timed_logs_fast and compile with
`cargo build --release --target=x86_64-unknown-linux-musl`.
* The resulting executable is `target/x86_64-unknown-linux-musl/release/check_timed_logs_fast`.
* If you `cd target/x86_64-unknown-linux-musl/release/` you can build the debian
package with the `fpm` command below.

	fpm -s dir \
		 -t deb \
		 --iteration 1plugins1 \
		 --architecture all \
		 --deb-ignore-iteration-in-dependencies \
		 --maintainer "Michael Mueller <mich@elmueller.net>" \
		 --name check_timed_logs_fast \
		 --verbose \
		 --version 0.0.8 \
		 ./check_timed_logs_fast=/usr/lib/nagios/plugins/check_timed_logs_fast


## License

	Copyright (c)

		2018 Michael Mueller, http://micha.elmueller.net/

	Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
	a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
	"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
	without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
	distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
	permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
	the following conditions:

	The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
	included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

	THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
	EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
	MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
	NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
	LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
	OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
	WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
